.\" Copyright (C) 2005-2009 Sun Microsystems Inc.
.\"
.\" This is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2,
.\" or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this; if not write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston MA 02110-1301 USA
'\"
.TH orca 1 "20 September 2013" "GNOME"
.SH NAME
orca \- a scriptable screen reader
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B orca
.RI [ option... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B orca
is a screen reader for people with visual impairments,
it provides alternative access to the desktop by using speech synthesis and braille.
.P
.B orca
works with applications and toolkits that support
the Assistive Technology Service Provider Interface (AT-SPI), which
is the primary assistive technology infrastructure for Linux and
Solaris. Applications and toolkits supporting the AT-SPI include the
GNOME Gtk+ toolkit, the Java platform's Swing toolkit, LibreOffice,
Gecko, and WebKitGtk. AT-SPI support for the KDE Qt toolkit is being
pursued.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-s, --setup
When starting
.BR orca ,
initiate the GUI-based configuration.
.TP
.BI "\-u, --user-prefs-dir=" dirname
When starting
.BR orca ,
use
.I dirname
as an alternate directory for the user preferences.
.TP
.BI "\-e, \-\-enable=" speech|braille|braille\-monitor
When starting
.BR orca ,
force the enabling of the supplied options.
.TP
.BI "\-d, \-\-disable=" speech|braille|braille\-monitor
When starting
.BR orca ,
force the disabling of the supplied options.
.TP
.B \-l, --list-apps
Prints the names of all the currently running applications.  This
is used primarily for debugging purposes to see if
.B orca
can talk to the accessibility infrastructure.  Note that if
.B orca
is already running, this will not kill the other
.B orca
process.  It will just list the currently running applications,
and you will see
.B orca
listed twice: once for the existing
.B orca
and once for this instance.
.TP
.B \--debug
Enables debug output for
.B orca
and sends all debug output to a file with a name of the
form 'debug-YYYY-MM-DD-HH:MM:SS.out' in the current directory.
The YYYY-MM-DD-HH:MM:SS portion will be replaced with the current
date and time.
.TP
.BI "\--debug-file=" filename
Enables debug output for
.B orca
and sends all debug output to the given filename.
.TP
.B \-v, --version
outputs
.B orca
version number and exits.
.TP
.B \-h, \--help
displays
.B orca
help and exits.
.TP
.B \--replace
Replace a currently running
.BR orca
process.  By default, if
.BR orca
detects an existing
.BR orca
process for the same session, it will not start a new
.BR orca
process.  This option will kill and cleanup after any existing
.BR orca
process and then start a new
.BR orca
in its place.
.TP

.SH KEYBOARD SETTINGS
Orca provides two keyboard modes, Desktop and Laptop keyboard layout. The
.B Orca_Modifier
key is 
.B Insert
in desktop keyboard layout and
.B Caps_Lock
in laptop keyboard layout.

.B Orca
uses default GNOME keyboard shortcuts to navigate the desktop and interact with various applications. The flat review commands provide an alternative method of interaction in certain inaccessible applications. It should not be confused with flat review functionality provided by other screen readers.

.SH Desktop Mode

.B Flat review commands

.B "Numpad-7"
move the flat review cursor to the previous line and read it.

.B "Numpad-8"
read the current line.

.B "Numpad-9"
move the flat review cursor to the next line and read it.

.B "Numpad-4"
move the flat review cursor to the previous word and read it.

.B "Numpad-5"
read the current word.

.B "Numpad-6"
move the flat review cursor to the next word and read it.

.B "Numpad-1"
move the flat review cursor to the previous character and read it.

.B "Numpad-2"
read the current character.

.B "Numpad-3"
move the flat review cursor to the next character and read it.

.B "Numpad-slash"
perform a left mouse click at the location of the flat review cursor.

.B "Numpad-star"
perform a right mouse click at the location of the flat review cursor.

.B Bookmark commands

.B "Alt+Insert+[1-6]"
assign a bookmark to a numbered slot. If a bookmark already exists in the slot it will be replaced with the new one.

.B "Insert+[1-6]"
go to the position pointed to by the bookmark bound to this numbered slot.

.B "Insert+B and Insert+Shift+B"
move between the given bookmarks for the given application or page.

.B "Alt+Insert+B"
save the defined bookmarks for the current application or page.


.B Miscellaneous functions

.B "Numpad+Plus"
 'say all' command; reads from the current position of the caret to the end of the document.

.B "Numpad+Enter"
 'Where am I' command; speaks information such as the title of the current application window, as well as the name of the control that currently has focus.

.B "Insert+H"
enter into orca's 'learn mode'; press Escape to exit.

.B "Insert+Shift+Backslash"
toggle live regions monitoring on and off.

.B "Insert+F"
speak font and attribute information for the current character.

.B "Insert+Space"
Launch the orca Configuration dialog.

.B "Insert+Ctrl+Space"
reload user settings and reinitialize services as necessary. Also launches the orca Configuration dialog for the current application.

.B "Insert+S"
toggle speech on and off.

.B "Insert+F11"
toggle the reading of tables, either by single cell or whole row.

.SH Laptop Mode

.B Flat review commands

.B "Caps_Lock+U"
move the flat review cursor to the previous line and read it. Double-click to move flat review to the top of the current window.

.B "Caps_Lock+I"
read the current line. Double-click to read the current line along with formatting and capitalization details.

.B "Caps_Lock+O"
move the flat review cursor to the next line and read it. Double- click to move flat review to the bottom of the current window.

.B "Caps_Lock+J"
move the flat review cursor to the previous word and read it. Double-click to move flat review to the word above the current word.

.B "Caps_Lock+K"
read the current word. Double-click to spell the word. Triple-click to hear the word spelled phonetically.

.B "Caps_Lock+L"
move the flat review cursor to the next word and read it. Double- click to move flat review to the word below the current word.

.B "Caps_Lock+M"
move the flat review cursor to the previous character and read it. Double-click to move flat review to the end of the current line.

.B "Caps_Lock+Comma"
read the current character. Double-click to pronounce the character phonetically if it is a letter.

.B "Caps_Lock+Period"
move the flat review cursor to the next character and read it.

.B "Caps_Lock+7"
perform a left mouse click at the location of the flat review cursor.

.B "Caps_Lock+8"
perform a right mouse click at the location of the flat review cursor.

.B Bookmark commands

.B "Alt+Caps_Lock+[1-6]"
add a bookmark to the numbered slot. If a bookmark already exists for the slot it will be replaced with the new one.

.B "Caps_Lock+[1-6]"
go to the position pointed to by the bookmark bound to this numbered slot.

.B "Caps_Lock+Band Caps_Lock+Shift+B"
move between the given bookmarks for the given application or page.

.B "Alt+Caps_Lock+B"
save the defined bookmarks for the current application or page.

.B Miscellaneous functions

.B "Caps_Lock+Semicolon"
 'Say all' command; reads from the current position of the caret to the end of the document.

.B "Caps_Lock+Enter"
 'Where am I' command; speaks information such as the title of the current application window, as well as the name of the control that currently has focus.

.B "Caps_Lock+H"
enter learn mode (press Escape to exit).

.B "Caps_Lock+Shift+Backslash"
toggle live regions monitoring on and off.

.B "Caps_Lock+F"
speak font and attribute information for the current character.

.B "Caps_Lock+Space"
launch the orca Configuration dialog.

.B "Caps_Lock+Ctrl+Space"
reload user settings and reinitialize services as necessary; also launches the orca Configuration dialog for the current application.

.B "Caps_Lock+S"
toggle speech on and off.

.B "Caps_Lock+F11"
toggle the reading of tables, either by single cell or whole row.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI ~/.local/share/orca
.B Orca
user preferences directory
.TP
.BI ~/.local/share/orca/user-settings.conf
.B Orca
user preferences configuration file.
.TP
.BI ~/.local/share/orca/orca-customizations.py
.B Orca
user customizations configuration file

.TP
.BI ~/.local/share/orca/orca-scripts
.B Orca
user orca scripts directory
.TP
.BI ~/.local/share/orca/bookmarks
.B Orca
user bookmarks directory
.TP
.BI ~/.local/share/orca/app-settings
.B Orca
user application specific settings directory


.SH AUTHOR
.B Orca
originated as a community effort led by the Sun Microsystems Inc.
Accessibility Program Office and with contributions from many community members.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IP \(bu 2
.B Orca wiki
.UR https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/Orca
<https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/Orca>
.UE
.IP \(bu 2
.B Orca mailing list
.UR https://www.freelists.org/list/orca
<https://www.freelists.org/list/orca>
.UE
.IP \(bu 2
.B Orca repository
.UR https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/orca
<https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/orca>
.UE
